---
title:  "Causality"
permalink: causality.html
categories: toi
tags: [blog]
---
The absolute law of our universe is causality.

Causality is the ability of all systems to output a proper reaction to any input action (action-reaction or cause-consequence are the same). Causality is not a sequence of abstract facts. It is a sequence of events related always to a system. Not scoping the involved system is a big and common mistake, most scientists are included on it. The study of causality is a root aspect of the Systems Theory (ST) (despite the systems theory is not properly developed yet). Probability is just an aspect of causality where the object of study focuses on the location of the consequence. Probability is selective about the outputs of a system, but always considers a clear set of inputs. Causality includes them all. An input or an output is called also a dimension. Inputs and outputs are not reversible, despite some systems may appear to feature reversibility. An input of a system has a degree of compatibility with the output of another: from null to full. Channels *do not* lose the transferred content, that is another interpretation error.

Causality principles apply to all types of systems. All systems react, non-linearly (reactions can be more or less intense or in a different dimension, that is, from another output channel) and with a delay (reactions are always sequential, that means that take some time to be outputted). The sequence of propagated actions and reactions generates the time row (if you observe a chain of falling dominoes, you can even estimate what time is it, just by looking at the chain's state; clocks use that principle but in a circular fashion, which permits infinite representations, that is an excellent interpretation of the time row of my friend Didier Semeux).

Systems input and output capabilities are limited by physical features. If systems do not react properly to all interactions towards them, they dissipate. Therefore, absolutely all natural systems (but not all possible systems) chain actions and reactions. Generalizing this idea delimited inside one system will lead to this: an action can only finish going back to the initial trigger system, in a different form. An amazing fact.

In consequence, reactions always go back to the systems that triggered them (with a different intensity, maybe a different dimension, and some delay). That complex mechanism is called interaction (see my book on the principles of interaction at ydor.org).

Causality is absolute, applies to all things on this universe, even to ideas.

Logic is our abstraction of this mechanism, causality. Reason is our capability of using logic. Logic is absolute (except con quantum physics, where causality laws we know are broken, therefore logic is useless; personally I think we need to relativize causality, probably by affecting the spacetime topology of systems interpretation -not existent-, which should change causality laws under extreme speeds or distances). Logic is expressed in all systems actions and reactions, including humans, including language, etc. Logic conducts all our acts. Ideas can be illogic due to unconscious issues, but logic is used based on those issues and we always use it. That is the basis of our personal incoherence. Example: suicide is incoherent: the suicide searches for a relief, but by killing himself, he destroys all possibilities of experimenting that relief. But suicide is logic: it is the same behavior of jumping of a building in flames to avoid suffering.

My theory of interaction draft proposes that systems on this universe have a mechanism (that we can't understand yet) that promotes existence and persistence, which contradicts the 2nd law of thermodynamics, essentially stating that disorder increases. This mechanism I call perstability is essentially the same as biological life or the mechanism that prevents a rock to dissipate easily, but instead to grow with time (rocks can absorb minerals from water and strenghten their structure or solidify with others on an appropriate environment; in fact, rocks can grow, on their time scale). Both mechanism are the same, perstability. Biological life is just a form of perstability.

Perstability essence is the capability of interacting to take subjective profit. When systems take mutual profit, systems get attracted and interactions become permanent (example, you buy an apple, subjectively the apple is more valuable than the coin for you, then you eat it, you take profit; the interaction coin/apple can become permanent: humans learned to eat apples; when two atoms start a permanent interaction and become a molecule, it is the same interaction principles in action). Systems that provide profit generate attraction, and destructive systems generate repulsion. But attraction on which space? The one of the involved interaction dimensions. Example: England going out of the EU is not a physical movement, but a just the closure of some dimensional channels between both systems. Economy, migration, for example of dimensions. It is clear that the repulsion consequences affect both whole systems.

Nature controls destructive systems not by destroying they directly, but by destroying their environment. Destructive systems destroy neighbors and that propagates to destroy the environment. That is precisely what religion is doing to religious groups, what IS is doing to islam. What humanity is doing with the planet. We are a race that just failed interacting with the environment, so we will destroy it, and nature need to replace us.

To revert the ecological damage we need to apply the causality principles chain on all our social behaviors. That is, finally, embedding the theories of systems and interaction to education. If we learn the rules of interaction, we learn how to persist on this environment. If we learn how things exist, we may help humanity to persist, our jobs, our economy, our families to get stabler. All of this knowledge is partially developed on my book. Part of the systems theory was rewritten, so the basis are ready. 